ARTICLE 1: Mission is to preach peace, says Pope in response to Trump attacks

Pope Leo has responded to attacks by US President Donald Trump, saying he hoped to be able to preach the Gospel and about peace, but anyone was free to criticise him.

In his latest remarks, Trump suggested that the Pope believed it was OK for Iran to have a nuclear weapon. The Pope has said no such thing, but he has opposed the US and Israel's war on Iran. His stance has angered Trump, prompting the US president to lash out repeatedly.

The latest exchange comes as US Secretary of State Marco Rubio heads to the Vatican for a two-day visit this week. The State Department said Rubio would work to "advance bilateral relations" with Italy and the Vatican and discuss "the situation in the Middle East and mutual interests in the Western Hemisphere".

On Tuesday ahead of his visit, Rubio denied that he was going to Italy to smooth over tensions between Trump and the Vatican. "It's a trip we have planned from before, and obviously we had some stuff that happened," he said.

Earlier on Tuesday, Pope Leo said he would continue to call for peace despite criticisms. "The mission of the Church is to preach the Gospel, to preach peace," he said. "If someone wants to criticise me for preaching the Gospel... I hope simply to be listened to because of the value of God's words."

Trump told conservative radio talkshow host Hugh Hewitt that the Pope was "endangering a lot of Catholics and a lot of people" because he "thinks it's fine for Iran to have a nuclear weapon". The Pope has not said he supports Iran having a nuclear weapon.

Brian Burch, the US ambassador to the Holy See, told reporters there was no "deep rift" between the US and the Vatican. "Nations have disagreements, and I think one of the ways that you work through those is through fraternity and authentic dialogue," he said.

The disagreement also led to tensions between Trump and Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni, who criticised the war in the Middle East and came to the defence of the Pope.

Pope Leo has spoken out repeatedly against the conflict, saying last month: "As a pastor, I cannot be in favour of war. I would like to encourage all to make efforts to look for answers that come from a culture of peace and not from a place of hate and division."

Trump answered by calling the Pope "WEAK on crime" and "terrible for Foreign Policy", and wrote on social media: "If I wasn't in the White House, Leo wouldn't be in the Vatican." Trump also posted an image depicting him as a Jesus-like figure, which was later removed.

Vice-President JD Vance, who converted to Catholicism, said the Vatican should "stick to matters of morality".

---

ARTICLE 2: Man charged with attempted Trump assassination indicted for assaulting Secret Service officer

The California man who allegedly tried to assassinate President Donald Trump at a Washington gala has been indicted on a fourth charge of assaulting a US officer or employee with a deadly weapon.

The new charge comes in the wake of questions over whether a Secret Service officer, who was shot but not seriously wounded in the attack at the White House Correspondents Dinner on 25 April, was hit by crossfire from another officer.

US Attorney Jeanine Pirro signed off on the new indictment unsealed on Tuesday. Cole Tomas Allen, 31, appeared in court in Washington DC last week. He has not yet entered a plea.

According to court documents, a grand jury indicted Allen on charges of attempting to assassinate the US president as well as two firearms offences — transportation of a firearm and ammunition in interstate commerce with intent to commit a felony, and using, carrying, brandishing and discharging a firearm during a crime.

The suspect was carrying a semi-automatic handgun, a pump-action shotgun and three knives as he allegedly rushed through a security checkpoint at the Washington Hilton hotel on 25 April. After gunfire rang out, Trump, Vice-President JD Vance, cabinet members and other White House officials were rushed from the hotel ballroom as dinner attendees sheltered under tables.

Allen studied at the California Institute of Technology and worshipped at the Pasadena United Reformed Church in the Los Angeles area. Federal campaign finance records show he donated $25 to a Democratic Party political action committee in support of Kamala Harris for president in 2024.

He allegedly sent an email to his family shortly before the attack that said: "Administration officials are targets, prioritised from highest-ranking to lowest. I would still go through most everyone here to get to the targets if it were absolutely necessary."

Allen, who remains in custody, could face life in prison if found guilty.

---

ARTICLE 3: What is Trump's 'Project Freedom' in the Strait of Hormuz?

President Donald Trump has announced a pause to the US initiative that aimed to help guide ships stranded by Iran's closure of the Strait of Hormuz.

Trump had said the initiative — Project Freedom — was a humanitarian gesture "meant to free up people, companies, and countries that have done absolutely nothing wrong". Iran has said vessels can only cross the waterway with its authorisation.

Trump announced the new initiative on Sunday. Iran's military said it fired at US warships to deter them from navigating the waterway, and the US says it sank small boats — threatening a ceasefire meant to end the war. Then on Tuesday, Trump said the initiative would pause "for a short period of time" to allow US-Iran negotiations.

The Hormuz Strait has remained largely blocked since the US and Israel launched air strikes on Iran on 28 February, blocking the waterway through which 20% of the world's oil and liquefied natural gas passes. The US says there are 22,500 mariners on 1,550 commercial vessels trapped in the Gulf.

US Central Command (Centcom) says that "guided-missile destroyers, over 100 land and sea-based aircraft, multi-domain unmanned platforms, and 15,000 service members" were being used to support the operation. Centcom commander Adm Brad Cooper said vessels from 87 countries were stranded in the Gulf.

On Monday, Centcom said two US-flagged merchant vessels successfully transited through the Strait and were safely headed on their journey. Shipping company Maersk confirmed one of its vessels was able to exit the Gulf with US military accompaniment. Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps denied any vessels had passed through.

Hours after the US operation started, Iran said it had fired against "American and Zionist enemy destroyers". Centcom denied any warship was hit, but confirmed Iran did fire cruise missiles at both US warships and US-flagged commercial ships.

The United Arab Emirates said a tanker affiliated with Adnoc, its state-owned oil company, was targeted by two drones. No-one was injured. A suspected strike also hit a South Korean cargo vessel anchored near the UAE.

Centcom commander Cooper said US attack helicopters were used to sink six small Iranian boats that were targeting civilian vessels. Iran denied this.

Grant Rumley, a Middle East expert who served as adviser to both the Biden and Trump administrations, said the plan to secure passage would be "very, very hard". "I think that the general consensus is that a resumption of hostilities is a question of when, not if," he said.

Nitya Labh, a fellow at London's Chatham House, said the US operation was "extremely risky" and "quite escalatory", adding that even if Project Freedom succeeded, "it will be a temporary relief at best".

At a briefing on Tuesday, US defence secretary Pete Hegseth said: "The ceasefire is not over. This is a separate and distinct project." Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Dan Caine said that even though Iran had fired at commercial vessels nine times, seized two container ships and attacked US forces 10 times since the ceasefire on 8 April, those actions were below the threshold of restarting major combat operations "at this point".

---

ARTICLE 4: How many ships are crossing the Strait of Hormuz?

Since the start of the US blockade on Monday, 15 vessels have crossed the Strait of Hormuz, nine of which have links to Iran, BBC Verify analysis of ship-tracking data suggests.

US Central Command has said its blockade applies to all ships entering and exiting Iranian ports. In an update on Tuesday, Centcom said in the first 36 hours no vessels made it past the blockade and six obeyed instructions to turn around.

Ship-tracking data suggests six of the ships which passed through the strait had previously visited an Iranian port. BBC Verify has not seen evidence of any tankers carrying full loads of oil or gas heading out from the Gulf into open sea during this period.

Tracking vessels relies on them transmitting their locations accurately. However, some ships may be turning their trackers off or transmitting a false position — a practice known as "spoofing". Experts have told BBC Verify this is common for sanctioned tankers linked to Iran.

The US-sanctioned tanker Rich Starry sailed east from Sharjah in the UAE through the strait but turned round and crossed back into the Gulf on Wednesday.

The Strait of Hormuz has become a focal point of the US-Israel war with Iran after Tehran effectively choked off one of the world's most important shipping lanes. An average of 138 ships passed through the strait each day before the conflict started on 28 February, according to the Joint Maritime Information Centre.

Trump has warned the US Navy will "blow to hell" any Iranians that attack them and will take action against any ship found to be paying transit tolls to Iran.

The disruption to shipping has sent shock waves across the global economy, destabilising energy prices and exposing how reliant international supply chains are on the channel that connects the Gulf with the Indian Ocean.

Jakob Larsen from the Baltic and International Maritime Council told BBC Verify he is concerned about the "risk of further escalation to involve direct attacks on ships" with the introduction of the US blockade.

Richard Meade, editor-in-chief of Lloyd's List, said: "You've had nearly 800 ships stuck in there for several weeks. Most of them are now loaded with cargo so the priority is going to be to get them out."

BBC Verify's analysis shows ships that have passed the strait have taken a northerly route close to Iran's coastline and within its territorial waters. Prior to the conflict, vessels usually took a more southerly route through the middle of the waterway.

Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Navy published permitted routes to be followed when passing through the strait "to avoid possible collision with sea mines", marking a region in the middle of the channel as a "dangerous area".

Centcom has announced that two destroyers — the USS Frank E Petersen and USS Michael Murphy — are in the area as part of a mission to clear "sea mines previously laid by Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps".

---

ARTICLE 5: Airlines cut 13,000 flights in May as jet fuel prices soar

Airlines have cut 13,000 flights globally in May as jet fuel prices soar due to the conflict in the Middle East, removing nearly two million seats from flights. The cuts come ahead of the UK half-term holidays at the end of the month.

Istanbul and Munich have seen the largest reduction in flights, according to aviation analytics firm Cirium. The cancellations for May represent just 1% of global flights and UK flights to key summer sun destinations are unaffected.

Jet fuel prices have more than doubled since the beginning of the war — one tonne was trading at $831 in late February, and by early April hit a high of $1,838. Airlines have said they are not currently experiencing fuel supply problems, but experts have warned that disruption to deliveries could bring shortages within weeks.

Many airlines have already pushed up ticket prices. Air France, KLM, Air Canada, Delta and SAS have already trimmed their summer schedules. Lufthansa said it would remove 20,000 flights between now and the end of October.

The destinations with the most cancelled flights are:
1. Istanbul
2. Chicago O'Hare
3. Dallas Fort Worth
4. Denver
5. Atlanta
6. Frankfurt
7. George Bush Intercontinental (Houston)
8. Charles de Gaulle
9. Amsterdam Schiphol
10. Charlotte Douglas (North Carolina)

In mid-April, the head of the International Energy Agency warned that Europe had "maybe six weeks of jet fuel left". The UK imports about 65% of the jet fuel it uses, a significant portion of which comes from the Middle East under normal circumstances. The closure of the Strait of Hormuz means those supplies cannot get through.

The UK government is preparing concessions including allowing airlines to cancel flights at busy airports like Heathrow well in advance, without the risk of losing valuable take-off and landing slots.

---

ARTICLE 6: The threat to summer holidays looming from jet fuel shortages

Jet fuel prices have risen dramatically on international markets since the start of the conflict in the Middle East. The Gulf region normally accounts for about 20% of the fuel traded on international markets each day and about half of Europe's jet fuel imports. With the Strait of Hormuz blocked for the past eight weeks, those supplies have not been available.

In late February, before the first US and Israeli airstrikes, jet fuel was trading at $831 per tonne in Europe. By early April, it had touched $1,838 — an increase of more than 120%. It has since retreated but has consistently remained above $1,500.

Jet fuel is essentially a highly refined form of kerosene. Because supplies are dictated largely by the availability of refining capacity, the loss of output from the Gulf has led to jet fuel prices increasing far more than those for crude oil. Europe has had five refinery closures in the last two years, while jet fuel demand has been rising year on year.

Fuel typically accounts for 25-30% of airlines' operating costs. EasyJet hedged 80% of its fuel supply for the first half of the year at $717 per tonne, but finding the remainder at prevailing prices cost the airline an extra £25m in March alone.

Some airlines — such as Air France KLM, Air Canada and SAS — have already responded by cutting their summer schedules. Lufthansa said it would remove 20,000 flights between now and the end of October. Virgin Atlantic has introduced surcharges ranging from £50 on a return economy class ticket to £360 for a business class fare. A flight from London to Melbourne in June now costs 76% more than it did last year.

In mid-April, the head of the International Energy Agency warned that Europe had "maybe six weeks of jet fuel left". Stocks at the key Amsterdam-Rotterdam-Antwerp hub are at their lowest level in six years. Before the conflict, Europe as a whole had about 37 days' supply available. Now this has likely dropped to 30 days. Twenty-three days is the critical point at which the IEA believes some airports would run out of fuel.

The UK imports about 65% of its jet fuel. Two of the refineries that closed were British, leaving just four in operation. The government is allowing airlines to cancel flights at Heathrow without losing valuable take-off and landing slots, and has asked refineries to maximise jet fuel supply.

The European Commission has made it clear that cancellations and severe delays due to jet fuel shortages will qualify as "exceptional circumstances", allowing airlines to avoid paying financial compensation to passengers.

One longer-term option is Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF), derived from wastes such as old cooking oil and agricultural residues. However, the industry is in its infancy, there is relatively little SAF available, and it typically trades at more than $1,000 per tonne more than conventional fuel.

---

ARTICLE 7: Prepare for turbulence - how a prolonged Middle East conflict could reshape how we fly

Dubai International Airport (DXB) is the busiest airport in the world for international passengers, handling more than 92 million passengers in 2024 — far outstripping London Heathrow's 83 million. Rival airports in Abu Dhabi and Doha handled some 87 million passengers between them. Under normal circumstances, these three Gulf airports together handle more than 3,000 flights every day.

The conflict in the Middle East has had a dramatic impact on global aviation. First, there was the paralysis of flights through some of the busiest airspace in the world. Then there is fuel — with supplies from Gulf refineries choked off after Iran blocked the Strait of Hormuz, prices have doubled since the start of the conflict.

The Gulf aviation model relies on passengers being flown in on long-haul services from cities around the world, to meet carefully timed connections to equally far-flung destinations. In 2024, 47% of Dubai's passengers were connecting flights, compared with 54% of Abu Dhabi's and 74% of Doha's.

"Within three hours flying time of the Gulf, you have the Middle East, the Indian subcontinent, verging on China. It's a huge market," said James Hogan, former chief executive of Etihad Airways.

The Gulf carriers — Emirates, Etihad and Qatar Airways — normally account for 9.5% of global capacity. Willie Walsh, Director General of IATA, said "there is no way the capacity provided by carriers in the Gulf can be replaced by European carriers".

More than 30,000 services to the Middle East as a whole have been cancelled since the start of the conflict. British Airways has introduced extra services to Bangkok and Singapore, while Lufthansa and Air France KLM have also added extra flights to Asia.

Competition from Gulf carriers had previously driven down long-haul prices. "Did the Gulf carriers cause lower fares? Yes they did. Take Gulf carriers out of the equation, air fares are going to go up, as sure as eggs are eggs," said Andrew Charlton of Aviation Advocacy.

Johannes Thomas, chief executive of Trivago, believes the conflict will have "a lasting impact because of the safety perception you have in your mind" and that it will take "maybe two to three years" before safety concerns are fully overcome.

If the Gulf can resume its role as a junction to the world, the industry will carry on much as before. But if that is not possible, the implications for long-haul aviation around the globe could be profound.